---
title: Essay 2
layout: about
permalink: /essay-02.html
---

{% include feature/nav-menu.html sections="Introduction;Origin and Impact of the Socialist Movement;The Decline of the Socialist Movement and Rise of the Communist Party During World War I;The Rise of the Anti-Communist Movement After the Bolshevik Revolution;The Tensions Between the Communist Party and the Anticommunist Movement During the Great Depression and World War II;Conclusion;Notes" %}

# America's Political Response to Communism


### Introduction

During the late 1800s and 20th Century, some Americans viewed communism as a solution to the problems of capitalism while the majority viewed it as a threat that clashed with U.S. values. The United States Senate and others recognized that America should spread democracy abroad to counteract the influence of communism. However, others, such as *The Daily Worker*, argued that communism instituted a system of worker equality and allowed them to shake off the chains of capitalist control. These tensions exacerbated conflicts between American communists and anticommunists. During 1898-2000, the United States developed a strained relationship with communism, centered around tensions between the communist, socialist and anti-communist movements, which culminated in the Cold War.[^1]

### Origin and Impact of the Socialist Movement

During the Progressive Era, the socialist movement in the United States positioned itself as a champion of worker reforms that sought to remedy the problems of capitalism, which demonstrated capital-labor conflicts. Beginning in 1898, labor activists viewed the industrialization and corruption of the Gilded Age as catalysts for social and economic inequality in the U.S. This inequality facilitated the founding of the Social Democratic Party and the Socialist Labor Party in 1901, who argued that America’s problems stemmed from “two distinct classes with conflicting interests.” This idea framed capitalism as a conflict between those who controlled the product of labor and laborers. Because of this conflict, socialists, such as Eugene V. Debs, campaigned for reforms, such as communal economic control, that sought to solidify government control over economic life in the U.S. William Mailly, National Secretary of the Socialist Party, reinforced this notion when he asserted that socialists should “combine democracy in management, efficiency in action and economy in labor and expense” to achieve their goals. He suggested that Americans should elect socialist candidates and use democratic means to enact reforms that benefited workers.[^2] The Socialist Labor Party provided Americans with a voice to advocate for solutions to some of their most pressing problems.[^3]


{% include feature/image.html filename="National Socialist Convention Image 1901.jpg" alt="This image shows the delegates to the National Socialist Convention in 1901." caption="This image shows the delegates to the National Socialist Convention in 1901." link="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/pnp/ppmsca/33900/33991v.jpg" %}

### The Decline of the Socialist Movement and Rise of the Communist Party During World War I 

During World War I, the socialist movement stifled dissent when they promoted a unified anti-war response, which laid the foundation for divisions within the movement. Beginning in 1918, Eugene V. Debs denounced U.S. involvement in the war and argued that “[the master class] has trained [the working class] to believe it to be [their] patriotic duty to go to war.” This belief framed World War I as another capitalist venture imposed upon the working class, which became the basis of the Socialist Labor Party’s anti-war platform. Because of this opposition, some socialists resisted all policies that required them to support the war effort, such as enlisting in the draft. However, while the Socialist Labor Party formally criticized war, John Spargo, a member of the National Committee of the Socialist Party, recognized that all Americas should contribute to the war effort. Spargo’s pro-war position demonstrated that some party members remained loyal to their country and broke away from the Socialist Labor Party. This lack of tolerance for opposing ideals set the socialist movement on a collision course toward disunification.[^4] 

The communist movement in the United States split from the socialist movement, which exacerbated tensions between socialism and communism. Beginning in 1919, extreme factions of the socialist movement decried the Socialist Labor Party because they refused to “align [themselves] with the Bolshevik of Russia, and the Communist groups in other parts of Europe.” This refusal facilitated the founding of the Communist Labor Party in September of 1919, who asserted that they should adapt their tactics to fulfill the requirements of the working class. This party framed communism and association with Bolsheviks as solutions to end worker enslavement in the United States. Because of these solutions, communists supported policies, such as raising the “living standards” of the workers, that sought to ensure the dominion of the labors at the expense of capitalism.[^5] Dr. Karl Sandberg, chairman of the Communist Labor Party, reiterated this idea when he claimed that communism would be a tool to ensure the “inauguration of Industrial Democracy.” The communist movement provided radical Americans with an opportunity to reform economic and social institutions, but faced opposition during the Red Scare.[^6]

### The Rise of the Anti-Communist Movement After the Bolshevik Revolution 

After the Bolshevik Revolution in 1917, the United States feared communists and its threat to American ideals, which demonstrated tensions between communism and democracy. In 1919, Senator Lee Overman, chairman of the Senate Overman Special Committee, investigated the ideology of what the committee termed as “Bolshevism.” Overman’s committee concluded that Bolshevik anti-democratic ideals penetrated U.S. society and threatened American values. This threat instilled fear in Americans and caused many to oppose communist ideologies, which led to the rise of the anticommunist movement. Because of this fear, the United States used the Espionage Act of 1917 and the Palmer Raids of 1919-1921, to root out radical ideologies. Attorney General Mitchell Palmer justified this elimination when he argued that “[America] can get rid of” those who “have infected our social ideas with the disease of their own minds.” He suggested that America should eliminate radical communist ideology from its borders to preserve democratic values. The United States rallied Americans around anticommunist ideology, but it did not diminish the influence of the Communist Party.[^7]


[Espionage Act of 1917](https://iowaculture.gov/history/education/educator-resources/primary-source-sets/americas-involvement-world-war-i/espionage){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"}

[Bolshevik Propoganda](https://ia600201.us.archive.org/32/items/cu31924030480051/cu31924030480051.pdf){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"}

{% include feature/image.html filename="U.S.-Russia-Relations-1900-1944-State-of-the-Union-Addresses.png" alt="This is an image of a trend graph generated from the 20th Century State of the Union Addresses from 1900-1945." caption="This trend graph illustrates how frequently each president mentioned communism, socialist, radical, revolution and Russia in their State of the Union Addresses from 1900-1945." %}

<blockquote class="blockquote pt-3 pb-5" style="font-size: 1.75rem; margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto; max-width: 650px;">
  <p class="mb-0">We here are convinced that never since [the] termination of [a] civil war have [the] mass of Russian people been emotionally further removed from doctrines of [the] communist party than they are today.</p>
  <footer class="blockquote-footer text-right">George Kennan, <cite title="Source Title">"<a href="https://www.trumanlibraryinstitute.org/kennan/" target="_blank" rel="noopener">The Long Telegram</a>"</cite></footer>
</blockquote>

### The Tensions Between the Communist Party and the Anticommunist Movement During the Great Depression and World War II

During the Great Depression, the communist movement championed economic reforms that could remedy the problems of capitalism, but they faced opposition from the anticommunist movement. In 1934, the Communist Party of the United States criticized President Roosevelt’s New Deal Reforms and argued that “Roosevelt and his New Deal represent the Wall Street Bankers and big corporations.” This criticism implied that the New Deal hurt the working class because it provided government aid to the capitalists at the expense of laborers. Because of this conflict, the Communist Party advocated for policies, such as unemployment, that protected laborers while decreasing capitalist earnings. However, while the Communist Labor Party sought to enact reforms that supported the working class, anticommunists, such as Elizabeth Dilling, recognized that communism “[undermined] America like a cancerous growth."[^8] Dilling’s characterization solidified the beginning of unified opposition against communism, which fueled the Cold War.[^9] 

During World War II, the United States recognized the Soviet Union as an ally even though it opposed Joseph Stalin’s communist positions, which became a catalyst for the Cold War.  Beginning in 1943, J.H. Burns, U.S. Major General and Army Executive, investigated the state of U.S.-Soviet relations and concluded that many government officials refused to adhere to President Franklin D. Roosevelt’s “good neighbor and sincere friend” policy.  This refusal implied that many Americans distrusted the Soviet Union and opposed the alliance between the United States and Russia.  Because of this opposition, Burns promoted policies, such as loyalty programs, that required diplomats to recognize America’s alliance with the Soviet Union.  However, Stanley Pieza, author of “150,000 Lithuanians in Siberia, White Paper to U.S. Asserts,” reasoned that Americans despised the Soviet Union because “Communist Russia [occupied] peace-loving Lithuania” when they “sent 150,000 Lithuanian citizens into Siberian exile and seized most of their children.”  Pieza’s characterization cemented America’s growing opposition to communism and the Soviet Union.[^10] 

### The Rise of the Anti-Communist Movement and the Policy of Domestic Containment During the 1950s

After World War II, the United States promoted anti-communist policies that stifled dissent, which demonstrated tensions between communism and democracy.  Beginning in 1946, President Truman viewed Joseph Stalin’s “Speech Delivered by Stalin at a Meeting of Voters of the Stalin Electoral District, Moscow" that denounced capitalism and discussed the Soviet Union's "five year plan of national-economic development" as a catalyst for the Cold War.  This speech facilitated the rise of domestic containment, which sought to eradicate communism through loyalty programs, such as Executive Order 9835 and the Taft-Hartley Act of 1947.  This idea framed the Cold War as a conflict between communism and democracy.  Because of this conflict, Congressional senators, such as Senator Joseph McCarthy, championed committees, such as the House of Un-American Activities, that sought to purge communism in the United States.  Stanford Law Review's essay "Control of Communist Activities," contended that "the real incentive for legislation to control Communist activities is the danger that domestic Communists will render us more vulnerable to the threat from Russia.”  This essay suggested that Americans should eliminate communism from its borders, while protecting minority ideologies.  The anti-communist movement and the rise of McCarthyism set America on a collision course toward Cold War divisions.[^11] 
  
During the 1950s, the United States promoted a unified anti-communist goal, but differed on how to achieve that goal, which created divisions within the anti-communist movement.  In 1950, Senator Joe McCarthy, author of "Enemies from Within," claimed that the United States was "engaged in a final, all-out battle between communistic atheism and Christianity.”  McCarthy's speech contended that communist anti-democratic ideals penetrated U.S. society and threatened American national security.  This fear instilled a staunch opposition to communism in America and caused many to oppose its influence, which led to the rise of McCarthyism.  Because of this opposition, Senator McCarthy used the McCarthy Hearings to purge radicals from the U.S. government.  However, while the United States agreed on the goal of ending communism, President Eisenhower, author of “Communism and Freedom,” argued that “to defend freedom, in short, is---first of all---to respect freedom.”  Eisenhower contended that the United States should allow dissenting voices and protect each person’s “right to disagree.” By stifling the communist movement in the 1950s, America set the stage for the emergence of radical ideologies during the 1960s and 1970s.   

{% include feature/pdf.html filename="NSC 68.pdf" caption="This is a National Security Report that outlines America's Cold War strategies." link="https://digitalarchive.wilsoncenter.org/document/116191 " %}

{% include feature/image.html filename="President Harry S. Truman's Unpublished Response to Senator McCarthy's Telegram.gif" alt="This is an image of President Harry S Truman's response to Senator Joseph McCarthy's telegram about communism." caption="This is an image of President Harry S Truman's response to Senator Joseph McCarthy's telegram about communism." link="https://www.archives.gov/education/lessons/mccarthy-telegram" %}

### Tensions Within the Anti-Communist Movement and the Rise of the New Left 

The anti-communist movement championed policies that suppressed radical ideologies, but faced opposition from leftist organizations, which challenged the domestic Cold War consensus during the 1960s and 1970s.  Beginning in 1962, student activists viewed Cold War containment policies as catalysts for domestic and political inequality in the United States.  This inequality facilitated the founding of the Students For a Democratic Society in 1960, who asserted that America’s social problems stemmed from “the hypocrisy of American ideals” and the growth of “corporate liberalism.”  This criticism implied that America’s focus on containing communism hurt ordinary citizens because it prevented them from enjoying the full benefits of a democratic society.  Because of this conflict, Students For a Democratic Society advocated for policies, such as civil rights for all Americans, and the eradication of starvation and disease, that shifted America’s focus toward using democracy to improve the lives of its citizens and others around the world.  Paul Booth, author of “National Program Outlined at Dec. NC For Coming Months,” reiterated this policy stance when he reasoned that America should “help [SDS] shape the future in the name of plain human hope.”  He demonstrated that the Students For a Democratic Society committed themselves to ensuring political and economic equality for all, which shaped President Lyndon B. Johnson’s “Great Society” initiatives. 

While the New Left campaigned for a more democratic society, anti-communists denounced this movement as a product of extremism, which illustrated a contradictory relationship between the communist and anti-communist movements. In 1970, Federal Bureau of Investigation Director, J. Edgar Hoover, investigated the growth of racial and anti-war protests on college campuses.  His investigation concluded that these protests threatened America’s democratic processes and sought to “[implant] the notion that the road to progress lies in threats, disruption and destruction.”  Hoover’s conclusion framed the campus protests as a conflict between democratic processes and violent extremism.  Because of this conflict, President Nixon used the Counter Intelligence Program and the FBI to root out perceived activists and radical organizations.  The FBI justified this purge when they asserted that “the purpose of the captioned program is to expose [New Left groups] for what they are.  The FBI suggested that America should eliminate the New Left groups and educate Americans on their goals to preserve democratic processes.  The Federal Government championed covert methods to achieve its goal of containing domestic communism. 

[Statement of J. Edgar Hoover, Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation Before President’s Commission on Campus Unrest](https://catalog.archives.gov/id/29915391){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"}

### The End of the Cold War 

The United States maintained its anti-communist policies and promoted democracy through the 1980s even as the Cold War ended in 1989, which shifted America’s perception on the meaning of domestic containment and its impacts. Beginning in 1980, President Ronald Regan argued that America “has an obligation to its citizens never to let those who would destroy freedom dictate the future course of human life.”  This belief framed American defense as a conflict between the expansion of liberty and the growth of communism, which became the basis for President Regan’s pro-defense agenda. Because of this pro-defense stance, Regan advocated for policies, such as the Strategic Defense Initiative and the elimination of the Berlin Wall, that protected democratic ideals and contained communism. However, after the Cold War ended in 1989, Tony Judt, author of “Extremism Without Virtue” reasoned that “when [the United States] set[s] aside [its moral values] in an eruption of righteous anti-Communist excitement, we sell it very, very cheap.” His assertion demonstrated that while America “won the Cold War,” they used anti-communism to justify anti-democratic decisions.  Judt and others questioned America’s commitment to its ideals and urged the United States to appeal to its sense of morality when it enacts policy decisions. 

### Conclusion

From 1898 through 2000, the socialist and communist movements appealed to a minority of Americans even when they faced resistance.  Socialist and communist leaders, such as Eugene V. Debs, advocated for reforms that eliminated capitalism and provided equal opportunities for all workers.  However, anticommunist leaders, such as Senator Overman, argued that communism promoted totalitarian values and threatened American democracy. These tensions changed the relationship between communism, socialism and anticommunism because America wavered between supporting or opposing communism.  This contradictory relationship raises one question: how the conflict between communism and anticommunism initiated the Cold War?[^12]

{% include feature/line-chart.html data="sotu-1946-2000" topic=" America as a World Power" %}

This graph demonstrates how frequently each president discussed America’s role as a global power in their State of the Union Addresses. It illustrates the growth of America’s global influence and its effects on the post-World War II liberal order. I chose to include this graph because it suggests that global defense became an important tool to contain communism. 


## Notes

[^1]: “One Year Old Today,” *The Daily Worker*, January 13, 1925, II edition, sec. 1, [Chronicling America](https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn84020097/1925-01-13/ed-1/seq-1/){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"}; Lee Overman, “Report of the Overman Committee” *Ideas and American Foreign Policy* (2018), 188-189.
[^2]: “Pledge of Socialists,” *New York Tribune*, January 8, 1920, 79 edition, sec. 26,716, pp. 1-24, [Chronicling America](https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn83030214/1920-01-08/ed-1/seq-2/#date1=1777&index=1&rows=20&words=America+elected+party+Socialist&searchType=basic&sequence=0&state=&date2=1963&proxtext=Socialist+Party+elections+AND+%22America%22&y=0&x=0&dateFilterType=yearRange&page=1){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"}; William Mailly, *National Convention of the Socialist Party 1904* (Chicago, 1904), 54-61, 148, 175, 201-203.
[^3]: “Social Democratic Party,” *The Advocate and News.* November 23, 1898, 10 edition. [Chronicling America](https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn85032019/1898-11-23/ed-1/seq-9/){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"}; Eugene V Debs , “Debs Attacks ‘the Monstrous System’ of Capitalism,” History Matters---The U.S. Survey Course on the Web (History Matters-- The U.S. Survey Course on the Web, accessed May 11, 2022, [History Matters](http://historymatters.gmu.edu/d/5725/.){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"};“Socialist Party of America Will Locate Here,” The St. Louis Republic , August 2, 1901, p. 6, [Chronicling America] (https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn84020274/1901-08-02/ed-1/seq-6/){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"}
[^4]: Eugene V. Debs “Canton Ohio Anti-War Speech” Ideas and American Foreign Policy (2018), 170; Charles T White, “Socialist Revolt over Anti-War Policy Grows,” *New York Tribune*, March 25, 1918, IXVII edition, sec. 26,062, pp. 1-14, [Chronicling America](https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn83030214/1918-03-25/ed-1/seq-14/){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"}
[^5]: “Against the ‘New Deal’ of Hunger, Fascism and War! For the Revolutionary Solution of the Crisis!” Daily Worker , April 28, 1934, sec. 2, [Chronicling America](https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn84020097/1934-04-28/ed-2/seq-1/){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"}; Lee Overman, “Report of the Overman Committee,” 188-189; 
[^6]:Tim Davenport , ed., “Minutes of the Left Wing Caucus of the 1919 Convention of the Socialist Party of America." Marxists.org (Marxists.org), accessed March 13, 2022,[Minutes of the Left Wing Caucus of the 1919 Convention of the Socialist Party of America](https://www.marxists.org/history/usa/parties/spusa/1919/0831-lwcaucus-minutes.pdf){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"}; Karl Sandberg, “Statement of the Illinois Delegates Who Withdrew from the Emergency Convention and Participated in the Formation of the Communist Labor Party." Marxists.org (Marxists.org, September 1919),[Statement of the Illinois Delegates Who Withdrew from the Emergency Convention and Participted in the Formation of the Communist Labor Party](https://www.marxists.org/history/usa/parties/cpusa/1919/09/0900-clp-illinoisstatement.pdf){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"}
[^7]: Lee Overman, “Report of the Overman Committee,” 188-189; Mitchell Palmer, “Attorney General A. Mitchell Palmer Makes ‘The Case against the Reds,’” HISTORY MATTERS - The U.S. Survey Course on the Web (History Matters, 1920), [The Case Against the Reds](http://historymatters.gmu.edu/d/4993){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"};David Asp, “Schenck v. United States,” Schenck v. United States (The First Amendment Encyclopedia ), accessed March 12, 2022, [Schenck v. United States](https://www.mtsu.edu/first-amendment/article/193/schenck-v-united-states.){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"}
[^8]: Elizabeth Dilling, *The Red Network: A "Who's Who" and Handbook of Radicalism for Patriots* (New York: Arno Press, 1935), 1.
[^9]: "Against the ‘New Deal’ of Hunger, Fascism and War! For the Revolutionary Solution of the Crisis!” [Chronicling America](https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn84020097/1934-04-28/ed-2/seq-1/#date1=1929&index=6&rows=20&words=COMMUNIST+Communist+PARTY+Party&searchType=basic&sequence=0&state=&date2=1939&proxtext=communist+party&y=0&x=0&dateFilterType=yearRange&page=1){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"}
[^10]: Franklin D Roosevelt, “President Roosevelt to Marshal Stalin,” U.S. Department of State (U.S. Department of State), accessed May 11, 2022, [President Roosevelt to Marshal Stalin](https://history.state.gov/historicaldocuments/frus1943CairoTehran/d2;){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"}; Stanley Pieza, “150,000 Lithuanians in Siberia, White Paper to U.S. Asserts,” *Detroit Evening Times,* October 16, 1941, sec. 16, p. 12, [Chronicling America](https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn88063294/1941-10-16/ed-1/seq-12/.){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"}; J.H. Burns, “The Executive of the President's Soviet Protocol Committee to the President's Special Assistant,” Teaching American History (Teaching American History, September 10, 2021), [Teaching American History](https://teachingamericanhistory.org/document/the-executive-of-the-presidents-soviet-protocol-committee-to-the-presidents-special-assistant/.){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"}
[^11]: Julia Emily Johnsen, *Should the Communist Party Be Outlawed?*, vol. 20 (New York, NY : H.W. Wilson Company, 1949), 7, 15, 11; Joseph Stalin , “Speech Delivered by Stalin at a Meeting of Voters of the Stalin Electoral District, Moscow,” Willson Center Digital Archive, (Willson Center Digital Archive), accessed May 12, 2022, [Wilson Center Digital Archive](https://digitalarchive.wilsoncenter.org/document/116179.){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"};“Taft-Hartley Act Labor Management Relations Act,” Taft-Hartley Act Labor Management Relations Act, accessed May 12, 2022, [Taft-Hartley Act](https://cpb-us-w2.wpmucdn.com/blogs.cofc.edu/dist/8/406/files/2015/02/TAFT-HARTLEY-ACT-1oqzhdd.pdf.){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"}; Harry S Truman , “Executive Order 9835,” EXECUTIVE ORDER 9835 | Harry S. Truman (National Archives), accessed May 11, 2022, [Executive Order 9835](https://www.trumanlibrary.gov/library/executive-orders/9835/executive-order-9835.){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"}; Joseph McCarthy , “‘Enemies from within’ Speech Delivered in Wheeling, West Virginia (1950),” “Enemies from Within” Speech Delivered in Wheeling, West Virginia (1950) (University of Texas), accessed May 12, 2022, [University of Texas](https://liberalarts.utexas.edu/coretexts/_files/resources/texts/1950%20McCarthy%20Enemies.pdf.){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"}; Joseph McCarthy,*Major Speeches and Debates of Senator Joe McCarthy Delivered in the United States Senate, 1950-1951: Reprint from the Congressional Record* (New York, NY: Gordon Press, 1975), 5.
[^12]:“One Year Old Today,” [Chronicling America](https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/data/batches/iune_emerald_ver03/data/sn84020097/00332897755/1925011301/0067.pdf.){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"}; Lee Overman, “Report of the Overman Committee,” 188-189; William Mailly, *National Convention of the Socialist Party 1904,* 148. 
